---
title: "Review: Robot Framework Test Automation (Bisht 2013)"
date: "2013-12-08T06:00:00Z"
tags: ["Review", "Robot Framework", "Testing"]
---

During the past year, I\'ve been lucky to meet many people new to Robot
Framework and help them to get started in writing acceptance tests with
it. While Robot Framework already comes with a nice [Quick Start
Guide](http://code.google.com/p/robotframework/wiki/QuickStartGuide) and
a very comprehensive [User
Guide](http://code.google.com/p/robotframework/wiki/UserGuide), there\'s
still a lot room for good narratives on getting started with it. So,
when I heard about a new book about Robot Framework, I was quite
excited. Unfortunately, [Robot Framework Test
Automation](http://bit.ly/1bXReXr) (Bisht 2013) appeared not to be the
book that I was waiting for.

[Robot Framework Test Automation](http://bit.ly/1bXReXr) is a new Robot
Framework book written by Sumit Bisht and published by Packt Publishing
(Oct 2013). The book gives a nice (short) introduction to acceptance
testing in general and a quite ok overview of the features available in
Robot Framework. After reading the book, you should have a good idea of
all the things that are possible with Robot Framework, but you might be
confused of how all the presented topics are related and how to actually
use them in practice.

While the book is a quick read to get familiar with most of the features
and concepts in Robot Framework, it\'s not a sufficient standalone guide
for actually writing any tests with it. For example, the book uses a few
different Robot Framework syntaxes inconsistently, and only a very few
examples are complete (without downloading the bundled source code). In
general, I would recommend to skip the examples in this book and learn
the best practices from the examples in the official [User
Guide](http://code.google.com/p/robotframework/wiki/UserGuide) instead.

However, if you find both the official [User
Guide](http://code.google.com/p/robotframework/wiki/UserGuide) and
[Quick Start
Guide](http://code.google.com/p/robotframework/wiki/QuickStartGuide) too
intimidating to get started with Robot Framework, you could try this
book to learn the concepts and possibilities, and then return to the
official guides for learning the details.

*Disclaimer: I got a review copy of the book from Packt.*
